[Music]
good morning
it's eight o'clock welcome to breakfast
with ben thompson and c mctecher
good morning our headlines for you today
reassurance on the uk's covid vaccine
program from ministers as the eu plans
to control the exports
the uk applies to join a trade agreement
with 11 countries around the pacific
it could make it easier for businesses
to sell to countries like canada
and australia good morning manchester
united's marcus rashford is the latest
player to reveal he's been racially
abused online in a tweet he says he's
been subjected to
social media and humanity at its worst
the story of how an accidental meeting
and the kindness of strangers saved one
family from the holocaust
and is this the perfect location for
binge watching films
a cinema for one in a lighthouse on a
remote island
good morning we're looking at a cold and
frosty start this morning many of us
will have a dry day with spells of
sunshine but in the west
we're going to see a band of rain moving
and this will probably bring
some snow to the hills of wales and
perhaps the hills of northern ireland as
well
join me for the detailed forecast a
little bit later on
[Music]
good morning to you it is sunday the
31st of january our top story today
ministers have said that they are
confident of the uk's kovid vaccine
supply
and expect the program to continue as
planned now that comes after brussels
said it would put controls on supplies
exported from the eu
now the total number of people who have
had a first dose of a vaccine in the uk
now stands at 8.3 million and the aim is
to have
15 million jabs done by the 15th of
february
now if the government is to reach its
own targets all
care home residents should be vaccinated
by the end of today
our political correspondent nick hurdley
reports
nearly eight and a half million people
in the uk have now had a coronavirus
vaccine dose
ministers believe the rollout is going
well and could be a way out of the
restrictions on our lives
in the eu though there have been delays
brussels had wanted to use
emergency powers from the brexit deal to
introduce controls between northern
ireland
and the republic but it ditched the
plans after widespread criticism
admitting it had made a mistake it
clearly was
a mistake in that regard i think however
what's important is that the channeling
channel of communications are
open and and they are constructive ones
they took on board
what we said um and they relatively
quickly pull back
but eu countries have been given some
new powers to control exports of
vaccines
the government here says it won't affect
its plans
we're confident uh we have assurances
that the supply that we have procured
the supply that we have paid for is
going to be delivered
that's why we are carrying on with our
program and i'm working with
ministers across the united kingdom in
order to make sure that we can
accelerate the rollout of that vaccine
program
to make sure that there are more jabs in
more arms exactly as we've planned
there have been concerns raised about
so-called vaccine nationalism
with warnings countries must work
together to beat the pandemic
the rollout is proving controversial
nick earley
bbc news
well let's speak now to our political
correspondent jessica parker jess
morning
to you uh look lots of important
vaccination deadlines coming up aren't
there over the next few weeks clearly
one today as well
uh how are we getting on as far as that
rollout is concerned
well as nick was just reporting there
ministers sounding
pretty confident as you say a deadline
of tonight to have offered and ministers
do talk about
offering the vaccine to all elderly care
home residents and i think we'll
probably
find out until tomorrow or the next day
as to whether that target has been met
then that really big target
or vaccinating or offering the first
dose of the vaccination to the 15
million most vulnerable and elderly
by the middle of february now clearly
looking at the figures there is some way
to go but
again the government sounding very
confident about hitting that target
beyond that they're looking to vaccinate
the top nine priority groups over 50s
by the spring and all adults in the
united kingdom
by september and i think as you look
ahead to the medium and longer term
naturally things
look a little bit less certain but
michael gove there a senior minister
saying that as things stand they think
that they will be able to deliver this
program
currently exactly as planned
interestingly though in terms of
day-to-day supplies how much vaccine
there is at any one time the uk
government
are being deliberately tight-lipped on
that
issue why is this so important why have
we seen this extraordinary last
few days in terms of the eu's
movements well of course really this is
because the vaccine's key to protecting
people particularly the most
elderly particularly the most vulnerable
but key as well across the world to try
and
unlock economies that have suffered so
much and unlocked society as well
yeah jessica for now thanks very much
jessica parker our political
correspondent
now the uk is applying to join a free
trade agreement made up of 11
pacific and asian countries as part of
post-brexit plans
the cptpp say that quickly
it's made up of australia canada japan
singapore and others and it generates
more than
13 percent of the world's income aruna
anger has more
one
exactly one year after waving goodbye to
the eu
the uk is seeking trade deals with new
friends
further afield in the asia-pacific
region
the cptp covers a market of 500 million
people
from australia and japan to chile and
mexico
countries around the pacific rim
generating more than 13 percent of the
world's income
the grouping aims to cut trade tariffs
between member countries allowing for
big reductions in import charges
that could mean no tariffs to export
whiskey to malaysia
or cars to canada but as with the eu
trade deals require compromise it's
going to be asked
to make concessions potentially quite
tricky ones
remember australia and new zealand are
members of this pact that
britain doesn't have a trade deal with
them yet and they have very strong
offensive
agricultural interests the immediate
benefits to the uk
might be limited cptpp nations account
for less than 10 percent of uk
exports that's dwarfed by the massive 43
of uk exports going to the eu but longer
term the uk hopes to build stronger ties
with nations
who provide uk manufacturers with
components
tariffs would be cut on uk exports of
food drink and
cars there would also be faster visas
for business travel
the uk will be the first country to join
which wasn't there at the start
and if all goes to plan will be the
group's second largest economy after
japan
and the icing on the cake it may be a
way of getting a warmer trade
relationship with the us
president joe biden has hinted at
joining the partnership
aruna ayenga bbc news
environmental groups are calling on the
government to review the hs2 rail
project
in the light of the pandemic the high
speed line was signed off by boris
johnson
almost a year ago before travel ground
hit
to a halt as kovid hit the uk
construction is underway
and the first phase between london and
birmingham is due to open at the end of
2026. investigators from the world
health organization have arrived at a
seafood market in the chinese city of
wuhan where the coronavirus was first
detected
some chinese diplomats and state media
have said
they believe the wet market is not the
origin of the
outbreak our china correspondent steve
mcdonnell
is in wuhan well it's a very
big day at least symbolically for the
who investigation team in wuhan because
they are
here at the market now
people will remember that it's here that
before it was closed down
we saw the first clusters of coronavirus
emerging
and because of that and the fact that
there are lots of exotic animals
being sold previously at the market
there was a theory that possibly it's
right here
that the coronavirus jumped from one of
those animals into human beings
however uh it's also possible that
this really was just a place where the
coronavirus spread because it's just a
crowded location so maybe you know
somebody came here they're infected
and then many more others got sick as a
result of that
either way we're not able to see what
the
who investigation team is doing inside
so we're not quite sure
how they hope that this visit will lead
to a better understanding of the origins
of the coronavirus
but earlier today they went to a massive
wholesale market
and there they spoke to people about
seafood actually and that's because
there's another theory
that the coronavirus possibly is able to
survive for longer than we thought
on frozen seafood now the chinese
government likes this theory because if
it was
possible maybe the coronavirus didn't
originate here after all maybe it came
in on say a frozen norwegian salmon who
knows
either way they won't be able to tell us
at the end of
this trip whether that's true or not
they also won't be able to tell us
whether this market
was the source of the virus the
scientists are saying this is a very
complex matter it's going to take time
and we're all just going to have to wait
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news